# SARS-CoV-2 epidemic in the South American Southern cone: cancombined immunity from vaccination and infection prevent thespread of Gamma and Lambda variants while easing restrictions?
Marcelo Fiori, Gonzalo Bello, Nicolás Wschebor, Federico Lecumberry, Andrés Ferragut, Ernesto Mordecki

All South American countries from the Southern cone (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay) experienced severe COVID-19 epidemic waves during 2021 driven by the regional Variant of Concern (VOC) Gamma and Variant of Interest (VOI) Lambda. However, from mid-June July and August there was a decline in different epidemic indicators in all five countries, indicative of epidemic control. In this study we investigate the impact of national vaccination programs and natural infection on viral transmission in the Southern South American cone by using the decoupling between population mobility and the viral reproduction number (Rt) as a surrogate marker of herd immunity. Our analyses reveals high correlation between the expected Rt estimated from mobility and the observed one from January to May 2021 in all countries analyzed and a clear decoupling between both since May-June 2021.

The mean estimated fraction of population immune around the decoupling time varied among countries from 29% in Argentina to 45% in Brazil, as well as the estimated relative contribution of vaccination immunity from 29% in Chile to only 1% in Paraguay. Remarkably, the estimated herd immunity threshold at decoupling point in South American countries with widespread use of the Coronavac inactivated vaccine like Chile (43%) and Uruguay (33%) was comparable to that estimated in Israel (42%). These findings support that populations from the South American Southern cone probably achieved the herd immunity threshold to contain the spread of SARS-CoV-2 variants Gamma and Lambda while easing restrictions. Presumed herd immunity was attained through both vaccination and natural infection and the Coronavac vaccine was an effective tool in controlling the community transmission of SARS-CoV-2 in South America. The herd immunity status, however, could be transient and affected by both waning immunity and spread of more transmissible SARS-CoV-2 variants.
